Actually, my first class and checking the roll, and I came to this name and I said, Mizzle.
And the young man stood up in uniform and said, it's Mizell, sir.
I'm sorry, Mr. Mizell.
Okay.
And there were quite a few of those along the way.
I very often had to repeat some of my phrases.
Those are the most difficult ones that one trips over.
And, of course, I had to ask many of the students to tell me what it was they were actually talking about.
As these misunderstandings, pun intended, as those misunderstandings occurred,
Was it always with a smile on the student's part?
Oh, yes.
They took it in very good vein, and I hope that I did in exactly the same.
We will chuckle about this, especially after the class was over.
These students were almost always majors in meteorology?
Yes, we had very few service courses as such because being a small number in the faculty we were kept very busy with trying to teach all the courses for the meteorology majors because they were at that time able to award all three degrees in meteorology so it was very wide-ranging.
more than likely the first entry level student in meteorology, did he take a freshman course or a sophomore?
Generally, and this was something that we have tried to alter through the years, basically he didn't get any significant amount of meteorology until his junior year.
Junior year.
some would take a course in the second semester of their sophomore year and we have tried to alter that and now this is done so that we get to know the students and we still have a large percentage dropout in the first couple of years because the students especially
since about the early 70s have tended to come in and think that the meteorologist stands in front of a map on the TV and just points out this thing that seems very glamorous and when they learn that they have a whole host of mathematics and physics courses some of them find this is a bit too much but we do get
about an equivalent number transferring in from fundamentally engineering coming in.
So that holds the enrollment about level at that time and they have got the maths and physics.
In nomenclature
What courses were you teaching in the early years?
I was teaching the two climatology courses, the statistical ones and the instrumental ones.
Use of instruments not only in meteorology as we envision it in the upper atmosphere and so on, but also of course instrumentation which is specialized for what we would now say is the environment.
that wasn't such an in-word at the time that we came along because while I'd been over here in the USA I had worked with a professor in biology in Emory University, Dr. Robert Platt and yes just the time I got here my first book came out in environmental measurement and interpretation we co-authored it
so that we used, you know, information from there to convey to the students the differences between instrumentation for the upper atmosphere and for pure meteorology, if there is such a word, such an animal as this, and environmental meteorology.
How long after you arrived, how long was it before you began to direct graduate students?
I think it was one year, one year, yes.
I think my first student got his degree, a master's degree in 64.
Yes, I came in 62.
And I never knew what a trail it was taking, and when I graduated my last one this May, he was the 81st.
81st?
Graduate student that I chaired.
Oh, my goodness.
Well, in mentioning that, give some examples of where they are now that causes you to be very proud.
Where are some of your products?
Well, I'm sort of embarrassed to say that some of them have already retired.
Some of them beat me to it because I enjoyed what I was doing so much.
But quite a few of them, as you would believe, are up.
in the National Climatic Data Center in Asheville and actually they span almost, I like to think of, three generations of my students up there.
Some of the senior ones are in major positions.
In fact we had one who has just retired from being director but
He was not my student at the time.
He was getting his PhD in the early 60s when I was here.
But many of them are section leaders up there, and they're a married couple, both of whom have just joined the NCDC, as it's known, group.
as meteorologists there and climatologists, and then also a number of the military people have gone on very high.
My last PhD student graduated about a year ago,
He is now also located in the same building as the NCDC and he's just made lieutenant colonel.
And then I have another student way back who is in charge of the meteorological section of the testing out in Las Vegas in Nevada
various military equipment and so he's director of that.
Another student went to Cargill, the agricultural pesticides people sort of thing, and built that up and became leader.
He was the first meteorologist they took on as far as I was aware and
I think he's just about retired now and he went and built this up until it's now quite a big section of their company.
And others are all over the world.
There was a Greek student who became a general and leader of the Greek Meteorological Service, the first one who got a degree in meteorology here.
We had quite a problem there because he just had a diploma when coming here and I had to speak up for him for being permitted to go on to a graduate degree with just a diploma.
But I'm always a great believer in, well, let's give these people a try.
It doesn't cost us anything.
And if they sink, well, that's very bad.
But if they swim, which they all have done, good for them.
And then I had the first two PhDs in meteorology
from Saudi Arabia they've gone back as heads of their sections and in the universities and so I keep check of keeping contact with about 30 of the 80.
Many women in meteorology?
Interesting point a very very
difficult question in a way because there was the attempt especially a number of years ago to try to get more women in and it was very very difficult basically the women didn't want to go into this and we still have just a minority and we had
Our first masters, I don't have a note of it here, student was, female was in the 80s and in the late 80s for the PhD, two women graduated together in a year.
So
A very small number now.
Now in what have grown to be the service courses that I taught, namely Agricultural Meteorology and Architectural Meteorology, there were sometimes as many as a third, 40% would be women.
And I always found them very, very dedicated students.
And they would be majoring in what?
In architecture, environmental design, in agriculture, it could be almost anything, entomology, wildlife, soil and crops, this sort of thing.
And I always used to say to my wife that when I had about 30% women in the course, I could put a bet on the first two at the end would be women.
In terms of their grades?
Of their grades.
They would be first and second.
Do you remember any amusing events regarding a woman being in the class?
Did anything change for the male students?
Since the women were nearly always in a minority, I don't know what was going on in the male thoughts, but
I didn't notice anything about this.
One thing I must mention was that in the earlier years there was more
courtesy towards the women, that especially a military student would open the door and let her out.
Now is just as likely to let, not the military I'm saying, would let the door slam in her face as she's walking up to it.
And that was something.
What about minority students?
Did they end up taking meteorology courses about the same percentage as others?
Very few.
We've had very few.
We have had, of course, in recent years, more from the Asiatic community, and almost without exception, they have been very, very dedicated students.
We have had a number of Latin American students, Spanish being the natural language, first language.
as far as Afro-Americans are concerned I'm just trying to think we've had one young lady who's gone on to be on the CNN weather and she was in one of my classes and we've had just a handful
seldom more than two in a class of perhaps eighty or so of Afro-Americans in service courses that I have taught.
There may be some exceptions to this.
Now, the tip here in your more than thirty years, well beyond thirty years, the typical undergraduate major in meteorology
arrives as a freshman planning to major in meteorology or transfers?
Without any numbers to back this, and this sends a shudder down the spine of a statistician, I would say that about 60% of them have come in
and worked through, and perhaps about forty percent would have come this engineering or perhaps physics route or something like that.
So that most of the transfers come from a science-based discipline.
Oh yes, yes, definitely.
Is there, does, geographically, are they urban youngsters or country youngsters?
Mainly, they have come from Houston or Dallas, Dallas-Fort Worth.
So urban.
Yes, definitely.
The international students tend to be from any particular part of the world?
Not in particular.
I have had them from Africa.
The African students usually have moved towards me because they know I spent many years in Africa.
And then these Saudi Arabian students have come.
We have had students from India, Greece, as I mentioned earlier, and others that have a Latin American background.
But nowadays, I'd have to put the emphasis on Korea and China, that we are getting many more students from those parts of the world.
Is there a particular reason for that?
Do you all have some special connection with those countries?
Not really.
I think that what has happened when the Chinese had the opportunity to get out, and students would write to just about every university, I think,
and if we had monies available and no US citizen applying for these jobs with those capabilities then we would invite those over they were very dedicated we had a number of people
Coming over for short periods, I had one professor coming over for two semesters from a university there, an agricultural meteorologist, and his requirement was to get two published papers so that he would go back and become a full professor.
We managed to do that, but he didn't earn a degree.
But that was the sort of pattern.
I think that in Korea it was more that they did have some money and support from the government in order to be able to come over.
But that has tended to dry up now.
Describe your teaching technique.
How do you teach a course?
What I try to do is first of all introduce them to what we are trying to do.
If I may illustrate it by the course in architecture, I say we are trying to build, to live with the atmosphere and to do that in a way that is
energy saving and therefore economically important and so there's usually a sort of few sentence statement of what we're trying to do and then basically I never did lecture from notes
That's not to say that I wouldn't have piece of paper in front of me with perhaps eight headings that I wanted to get through in the course so that it kept me on track.
I always felt that in many cases it was best to speak from the experience after you've got one's own thoughts ordered of course and not jump from topic to topic.
And another thing that I did, except for one time when I was sick, I graded every one of my own papers and I never used True Force and I never used a Scantron.
I would grade them all.
That was the only way I felt that I could become aware of
hmm, the student really obviously hasn't understood this last theme, so let's have a get-together.
Or to be able to say, well, their percentage has gone down from the last test or gone up, which was very good, and communicate that to them.
Give praise where it's needed and guidance where it's needed.
And try to keep a rapport with the students in that manner.
Normally you gave how many tests per semester?
About three or four.
And were there, in meteorology, are there term papers, term projects?
In some there were.
I found that a very rewarding way of doing things with regards to the one in regional climatology, which then later became regional and physical climatology, was to let them choose an area of the world
not an area that they knew, and write about what the weather was, how we believe that that weather originates, why you get that pattern, and then the impact of the weather on the life of the people there, what clothes they wear, what houses they build, what crops they grow, what animals they have, and all that sort of thing.
And the students loved that.
I really did.
Oh, now that causes a question to pop into my brain.
Based on your experience, what would have been the most difficult regions of the country, of the world, that a student could have selected for that?
Where would the weather be most difficult to predict, understand, describe?
When you get right down to it, the most difficult to predict is wherever you are at that time.
You could sit in the middle of the Sahara in Taman Rasset and say, it's not going to rain today, it's going to be very hot and so on.
That way you would miss the extreme.
You would not... Forecasting... Is it not?
I would say that
It comes right down to it of forecasting either isolated events such as
big thunderstorms and so on, which make a large impact on the community, or organised systems like fronts and so on.
We're learning, of course, during the hurricane season, any year particularly, from July to October, that it's very difficult to forecast where the hurricanes are going to go.
They go where they want to go, like the old six-foot gorilla.
And I'll never forget one of them, where we, at a faculty meeting, we'd sort of... All came to an agreement, which was very unusual, that this hurricane moving into the Gulf at the time, it's a name I forget, was going to curve, come up to the northwest, then north, and come in through Texas.
It must have hurt us because it continued straight west and went into Mexican mountains, didn't do anything that we're supposed to do.
And fronts, of course, are very confusing, as you notice what happens so often if you watch Weather Channel or hear the news, but when we've got perhaps three fronts moving in,
to our region, our region being Oklahoma, Arkansas, Texas, and so on.
You don't know which one's going to win out, because it's all energy flows, and we just don't know which one has the biggest punch that's going to make its way through.
Is the Texas weather that you and I have, is it more complex than most other areas, or is it about average in its complexities of prediction?
Again, I suppose it's hedging.
It will depend where you are in Texas.
But, you see, we do have, for instance, we can, unfortunately, just about predict with 80 or 90 percent accuracy what the summer's going to be like in 2010.
Hot, humid, not enough rain.
we get a good idea of what the winter is going to be we have in this whole region generally a few mini winters which might last a few days or just a couple of weeks and go and so overall one can say that this is the sort of condition we're going to get but at certain times of the year fall and the spring
then it's a different game.
So the complexity not only changes with your location, but the time of year, the season, really.
Would Texas be
different from other regions in those generalizations?
No fundamentally they all have real problems that impact upon the people drastically and disastrously sometimes at certain times of the year when you just have to keep up to date with what is going on and
We find that there's really nothing to beat watching a radar screen to see what's happening in order to try and get an idea of what's going to happen in the, say, the rest of the day, or the next few hours at least.
All that information is available to us now on TV or on our computers.
After you moved to Texas, what were the greatest surprises for you about the realities of Texas weather?
Number one would have to be, although I knew of course in terms of numbers what the summers were like, that what it really interpreted as.
People would say to us, well of course you've come from Africa, you've been years out there,
He said, now, wait a minute.
It was never like this.
When I was in very hot places, such as the Nubia and the Saharan Desert and these sort of spots...
We might get 120 but the humidity was 5 or 7 percent and when we had very high humidity it was usually near on the Great Lakes or by the oceans and so there was the ameliorating effect of the sea breeze and coming off a cooler water body.
And so the idea of getting 100 degrees with very high humidity, no, we really hadn't experienced that.
While I was getting caught out, you'd look out as we could today and say, gosh, oh, isn't it lovely?
I'll go out and work in the yard for a while.
Ten minutes later, I'd have to call for Joan to help me in.
And it's very, very deceptive.
Now, and our northers, as we Texans call them,
is the rapid movement and severity of those that's kind of unusual isn't it?
That is very extreme.
It's because at that time of the year you're getting a big mass of air moving over a cold inland region.
And so you're likely to get that only in an area with big land mass, such as North America or Asia.
But you see in Asia, if you think about it, the big mountain chains run east-west.
Right through the, from the Alps, right through the Caucasus, the Pamias, the Himalayas, the Chinese mountains, and they block it.
Here our main mountains run north-south, and they don't do a very good blocking job.
They funnel things down.
And so we get very extreme conditions.
Hadn't thought about that.
Let's see, back to teaching.
Surely there were a few times when some student came to you with some fable about his or her problem that had to have special consideration.
Do you remember any of those anecdotes that you can share where a student had a sob story that they apparently had made up
Perhaps the students that I had were not too original thinking on this.
It was the loss of something that had been taken from their car or so on.
But no original anecdotes that you might read in Reader's Digest or something.
My favorite example is a boy who told me the first day of class when I told them when the tests were and that that's when they had to take them.
He came up and told me how ill his grandfather was.
And I said, oh, I hope it's not terminal.
He said, oh, it's almost certain.
And I said, oh, gee.
And then he grinned and said, in fact, it's almost certain he's going to die the first day of deer season.
So we both chuckled.
Let's see.
Any examples that you recall of student thoughtfulness for you as a faculty member?
courtesy, politeness?
I would have to say innumerable small occasions.
I've really been impressed by the politeness of the students.
I've also appreciated receiving notes from them, thanking me and
even now years afterwards getting emails and saying how they're using these data and the concepts we put forward and so on and that is sort of what makes teaching well worthwhile rewarding
aspects I think of two that covered the same ground basically but many years apart and I so wish that that had been repeated
200 times, and that is when advising students, the undergraduate students that you follow through from freshman to senior.
Twice a student, when we have talked about what they really need, have said, well I also want to take, or I want to drop this other course because I want to take this one.
that won't count towards my degree, but I want to get a rounded education, and I would like to do that.
And so, right away, all right, that's it, Steve?
Yes, that's it.
And I've always thought there was a sort of unfortunate...